Karen Rossell on April the 6th at Texas A&M
University concerning reconnaissance missions
flown over Southeast Asia. How many missions did
you fly? 150.
Did you volunteer or were you sent there? I
volunteered. Volunteered to go? When did you fly
these missions and where? I flew from January of
1973 until about mid-November of 1973. And I flew
in all over South Vietnam, all over Laos, and all
over Cambodia. And I flew a few training missions
over Thailand. What was the purpose of your
missions during this time period? Intelligence
gathering. Primarily with pictures, although we
also used a few other sensors like infrared and
visual reconnaissance. What were you trying to
pick up for the intelligence? What were you trying
to take pictures of? Well, several things. For one
thing, we did bomb damage assessment, BDA if you
will, of targets that had been struck by various
means, but primarily targets that had been struck
by air. We also did target development. That is, we
would run or take pictures or do visual
reconnaissance primarily of roads on the Ho Chi
Minh Trail, which is basically through Laos, a
system of roads through Laos where the North
Vietnamese sent troops and supplies down to South
Vietnam. Although we also ran several other
roads. We looked at a lot of other roads all over
Southeast Asia just to see what was going on on
those roads and pick out targets for later bombing
or what have you. Did you have any other
involvement in Southeast Asia prior to these
missions? Any type of at-home involvement, like
maybe doing stuff that like relay stuff as opposed
to being actually over there? No. I guess not. No.
What were your feelings on the war and the United
States' involvement in the war? And did it change
over time? Did you have like a certain opinion when
you first, you know, like in the early 60s and then
as time progressed, did your opinion change on it?
I'd say my opinion remained fairly consistent
from about 1960...
four up until 75 my feelings were relatively
stable and I primarily thought that we were
screwing up pretty badly by not taking a tougher
stance, i.e.
bombing North Vietnam heavily and not
restricting ourselves so much. What kind of
information were you given as to why you were there
and what was going on there? Were you well informed
as to exactly why you were going over there, or was
it kind of like you were just going and you really
didn't know exactly what your mission was at the
time? Well, I knew exactly what I was going to do. I
was well informed, I guess, from my little piece of
the pie, realizing, of course, I was only 29 years
old and...
a young captain, so I was not one of the major
planners, nor a major leader, but I knew exactly
what I was going to have to do, and there were very
few surprises to me. So you were well informed of
what the situation was over there? Because in our
class we've learned that a lot of stuff was kept
from the people in the United States, a lot of stuff
was I guess like the Gulf of Tonkin resolution
stuff, stuff wasn't told the way it actually
happened. It was kind of masked. Were they more
informative with you on stuff like that? Well, I'm
not sure I know what you mean by that. I'm not sure I
know what you're talking about with the Gulf of
Tonkin resolution. They said that some of the
stuff was told to the public that it was happening
at a more escalated rate than it actually was. the
United States may not have needed to react as
quickly because things weren't actually
happening. They kind of upscaled it to get the
American people behind it. Well, the Gulf of
Tonkin resolution was in the mid-60s somewhere. I
believe it was about 63 or 64, wasn't it? Yeah, it
was pretty early. And when I went over there, it was
almost 10 years later. And for me to give an
accurate assessment of... of our public affairs,
the military's public relations with
the press, I can't evaluate that because I really
don't know. I can tell you that I felt fairly well
informed. That's not to suggest, however, that I
knew or understood everything that was going on in
all of those countries because it was a very
complicated war. What kind of preparatory
information were you given before these
missions?
Well, it sort of depended on where I was going and
what I was doing. We flew a lot of different tactics
while I was there. In one year, things changed a lot
and we did a lot of different kinds of things and we
flew in several different countries. So it
depended on where we were going. But essentially,
prior to every mission, got an intelligence
briefing by typically a fairly young
intelligence officer on what the situation was,
where we were going to be going, and then an
overview of what was going on all over Southeast
Asia. So in general, I felt a pretty good idea of
what was going on. Does that answer your question?
Yeah. Were you given any type of cultural
background into the Southeast Asian culture
before you went? Not in any great detail except to
the extent of how to deal with captors in the event
of coming to POW. Okay, that's the next question.
What would happen if you were shot down and taken
prisoner and how are you prepared for this event?
as well prepared as one could be at the time when I
went over there because by that time we had a lot of
intelligence on how the POWs were being treated
and what was going on. So I was, I felt like I was well
prepared
as far as knowing what to expect when I became a POW.
I knew that. What kind of things did they tell you to
expect?
Well, that's a wide-ranging question. But in
general,
fairly rough treatment by the general population
if you were not picked up by regular troops. But if
you were picked up by civilians, you could expect
very rough treatment, perhaps not to survive. If
you were picked up by regular military troops, you
could expect to get a little bit better treatment
and to initially start out with intense
interrogation, poor treatment to include
physical abuse. And then shortly after that,
isolation for a period of time, varying depending
on where you were and what was going on. It could
vary how long you'd be in isolation. And then
ultimately to rejoin and be with other prisoners.
And that's just a very short synopsis,
but we felt like we were fairly well, or I felt like I
was fairly well prepared. And since I was in a
high-threat aircraft, the RF-4, I expected
I had a better chance of being shot down than a lot of
other people over there. So I more or less expected
it to happen. Were these missions kept from the
general public? By the way, there was another
problem. Excuse me. Another problem developed
while I was there that might be interesting. The
POWs were released in March of 1973. So I was still
flying until November. So we had some difficulty
there. We were not certain. Our rules were vague on
what was going to happen if we got shot down.
because we were still flying combat missions, and
this is not commonly known, I guess. We were still
flying a lot of combat missions after the POWs were
released, and we weren't real sure what was going
to happen to us if we got shot down. In other words,
who was going to come help us was a question,
which caused us a little bit of concern. We were not
Concerned over whether you'd be recognized for
actually being there? No, concerned over whether
or not we would be, well, let's see, how can I say
this? Whether or not we'd get
a good strong attempt at a rescue, let's put it that
way, a search and error rescue, because the POWs
had already been released and it was kind of, we
weren't real sure what the rules were going to be,
that's the best way to put it. We more or less
expected Air America to help us. So it wasn't
common public knowledge that you were there after
the POWs were released? Well, I'm not sure if it was
or not. I guess it probably wasn't. I don't think a
lot of people realize that there was still an air
war going on, or that is, U.S. air was being used
extensively after the POWs had been released, at
least all through the year of 73. Were you able to
tell your family about these missions, or were
they, I guess if they were intelligence, they
were... probably I I don't I didn't I don't know I
guess I could have but I didn't think that they
didn't tell them I didn't think they'd understand
okay do you know how these pictures were to be used I
mean what they what exactly I guess they were used
to to find targets and did I know how they were going
to be used yes I knew how they were going to be used
okay uh I was uh well depending on what they If it was
BDA, it was going to be used to determine how much
damage was done to a target and whether or not it had
to be struck again. And if I was searching for
targets, I knew that if I found them, that we would
ultimately go back and hit them, probably. And
that was the concept. From what you saw, were there
any different policies that could have been
followed to keep communism out of Southeast Asia
besides the further bombing of the North? You
already said that earlier, but... Any policies
that you thought that the government could have
taken
to, I guess, to cause a winning situation? Well, I
don't really, I don't think I feel qualified to
answer that question, although I'll give you a
sarcastic answer. Yeah, we could have chosen the
other side. And that's a theory that's been put
forth before, is we could have taken the other
side. We could have taken Ho Chi Minh's side and
perhaps kept communism out of there that way. What
do you think of the role of the press in Southeast
Asia? I know that a lot of people say that they think
that the press lost the war. What's your opinion on
that? No, I don't think it was the press. No, I don't
think the press was a factor in causing the war to be
lost. I don't think the war... I'm not sure I even
agree that the war was lost. But I don't think the
press had that much to do with it. I think the
administrations who were running the war screwed
it up and could have handled the press better um
what do you think of the role the cia had what kind of
involvement the cia had in southeast asia do you
know of anything again i'm not a i'm not i'm not sure
i'm qualified to answer that uh what do i think of
the cia's role or yeah what do you i mean do you think
they had a big role or that maybe their role could
have been bigger or that they could have done
something else or done less? Well, they had a
pretty big role, and I'm not sure exactly how big. I
know that they
were participants. I saw them participate,
especially with airplanes in Air America.
But I don't feel qualified to answer that. I don't
think I know. What do you know about Air America?
Personally, I've never heard anything about it
until in this class that I'm taking. What kind of
role did they have? What did they do? Well, they
essentially did things that the military could
not do.
They flew a lot of dangerous missions over there
that we didn't or would not fly or could not fly.
They landed in places where we couldn't go.
They flew unmarked airplanes, and they were an
airline, you know, and technically, I guess, not
representing
or the theory was that they were not representing
the U.S. government. What was the purpose of them
being there? Because I know that in the movie that
they had on Air America, they had that they were
dropping, I know that that was an awful movie, but
they were dropping food and stuff like that over
Laos and Cambodia mostly. Well, they did a lot of
that. They operated a lot in Laos, I know that.
Was that the major purpose of their mission, was to
feed the people? Well, that was one of the
missions. But I mean, they weren't there to help
the Pathet Lao or the communist Laos take over the
country, I can tell you that. They were on our side,
our side being against communism. And that's an
oversimplification, I realize, but I really
don't know any other way to say it. And as far as
getting into detail about their operations, I
can't, because I just don't know that much about
it. What do you think of Jane Fonda's role in
Southeast Asia, or what kind of effect she had?
Well, I kind of hate to dignify Jane Fonda by even
discussing her. I think that it's unfortunate
that the press would have given her the time that
they did. in the public eye. And I would join with
all the POWs and most of the military people who
were around during that era in despising what she
stood for and what she represented. And I guess it
remains a fairly emotional issue with me as it does
with most other people who were in the military at
that time. She had an impact, and she did, and you
can ask most of the POWs, she caused problems for
them by going to North Vietnam. Do you think that
she was, because I've heard that there were other
people that had the same view, that she got more
press than, because she was already famous, that
she got more press than other people. Do you know
anything about any other people that were
involved in that, or in her same mission for going
over there and her Well, I'm sure that there were
others. I don't know who they were, and I don't
remember. I mean, that's been so many years ago
now, and I don't remember who they were. I'm sure
there were others, but she's the one who sticks out
in my mind and most other folks' minds, and she's
the one who's remembered. And she got so much
press. She got so much press. Okay, that's it.
Thank you.